rfc: centralized process to update the future work artifacts (#428)
thousandbrainsproject/tbp.monty: rfcs/0000_future_work.md

- It's cumbersome to add new structured data and have it be useful to the community.

There are some upsides to the proposed approach:

- We would like the community to more easily find work to contribute to based on their skills, desire and available time. The skills and scope data doesn't currently exist and adding it to a single place would be preferable.

- Having a central place to create and manage the future work should reduce the friction of adding new types of work or enriching existing documents.

Please note: there is manual maintenance work to keep these three places in sync, and there is also work to keep track of who is working on what and which work is complete - this RFC will not remove all of that manual work but does intend to reduce and centralize two of those places.

# Guide-level explanation

New types of front-matter are suggested along side the existing `title` key.
Specifically targeted for the future work section.

## New Front-Matter Values

|        key|values|
|----------:|:-----|
| tags      | infrastructure, refactoring|
| size      | small &#124; medium &#124; large &#124; unknown|
| rfc       | required &#124; optional &#124; not-required|

> 

Reviewer: I like those ideas! Two minor thoughts:
- Maybe calling it "Suggested background / skills" or the like, rather than "Required". 
- Not adding the related milestone to avoid duplication of information across Shortcut and here. I would rather that on Shortcut we link to any Future Work sections that are relevant, but not that we require them to be bidirectional.

- It is not possible to filter the tasks by different aspects. The only grouping we currently have is which Monty component a task relates to (columns in the sheet + sections in the docs). But it would be useful to also be able to filter by skills required, scope, output type, etc...

There are some upsides to the proposed approach:

- We would like the community to more easily find work to contribute to based on their skills, desire and available time. The skills and scope data doesn't currently exist and adding it to a single place would be preferable.

- Having a central place to create and manage the future work should reduce the friction of adding new types of work or enriching existing documents.

Please note: there is manual maintenance work to keep these three places in sync, and there is also work to keep track of who is working on what and which work is complete - this RFC will not remove all of that manual work but does intend to reduce and centralize two of those places.

# Guide-level explanation

New types of front-matter are suggested along side the existing `title` key.
Specifically targeted for the future work section.

> ## New Front-Matter Values

Reviewer 2: **issue**: I would like to be able to link to "not docs." For example, with platform future work, I want to be able to link to various nodes in the Platform Future Reality Tree (coming soon). For my specific use case, this would take the form of an Excalidraw element link, for example (private for now) `https://app.excalidraw.com/s/gO8aypxgkZ/4kfSdu3bCjU?element=aGNP8x_-ZaXCJPnpdw-oX`. But, perhaps a generic URL likability would be useful? I may want to link to multiple things, for example a node in Future Reality Tree, a node in Current Reality Tree, a Wardley Map.

Author: I think this could be achieved by having the future-work/platform/control-multiple-end-effectors.md
```
---
title: etc..
---
![](https://app.excalidraw.com/s/gO8aypxgkZ/4kfSdu3bCjU?element=aGNP8x_-ZaXCJPnpdw-oX)
```

and then have the github_readme_sync tool know how to expand that image link from excalidraw -> png.

I wrote a quick POC using playright that can do this.  It used this public URL - https://excalidraw.com/?element=byEWeqJhL99OBt3ILGrHz#room=6f3a8e1a90222bec7204,mixaXny2sMOVunIlfrt6tA

and got this png out.

<img width="992" height="557" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8c4f079e-dfde-4f9d-a345-acd9527ec5e7" />

Reviewer 2: I'm sorry, but I don't specifically need anything embedded. I was thinking more of a "just-a-link" link that someone can click on. Clicking an Excalidraw link would just take them to the public read-only Excalidraw view.

Author: ah, got it - we could add an extra-link type metadata that will then show up in the table if its present?

Reviewer 2: > I guess it maybe helps to be directly clickable from the table?

This is what I was thinking, but this is probably not that important, and I can link from the markdown file like a normal person 😬.

- Having a central place to create and manage the future work should reduce the friction of adding new types of work or enriching existing documents.

Please note: there is manual maintenance work to keep these three places in sync, and there is also work to keep track of who is working on what and which work is complete - this RFC will not remove all of that manual work but does intend to reduce and centralize two of those places.

# Guide-level explanation

New types of front-matter are suggested along side the existing `title` key.
Specifically targeted for the future work section.

## New Front-Matter Values

|                key|values|
|------------------:|:-----|
| `tags`            | `infrastructure`, `refactoring`|
| `estimated-scope` | `small` &#124; `medium` &#124; `large` &#124; `unknown`|
| `rfc`             | `required` &#124; `optional` &#124; `not-required`  &#124; `URL to RFC`|

And these values after that work has begun:

|              key|values|
|----------------:|:-----|
| `status`        | `completed` &#124; `in-progress` |

> | `owner`         | `codeallthethingz`, `vkakerbeck`|

Reviewer 2: **issue**: I think this should be adjacent to something other than ownership, like "contributor." We don't assign GitHub issues to people because we don't want to prevent others from working on those things. There is no guarantee that the "owner" would see the task through or that they own the task in any meaningful way.

Author: changed to contributor.

These structured pieces of data are extracted to a central file for downstream visualizations and consumers.

Of note, a tabular representation of this data so that the community can interact with the future work data and find items that might be suitable for their skills / desires / time appetite.

The widget will read in the structured file mentioned above, and give the user an interface to allow them to sort and filter the future work.

A mock-up of what that table may look like:

![](0000_future_work/table.png)

# Reference-level explanation

> As mentioned above, the front-matter of all the docs in the in the `/docs` folder will be extracted and put into specified data file `/tmp/index.json`.

Reviewer 2: **issue**: `index.json` is pretty all-encompassing and non-specific. Can we change it to something more specific, like `future_work.json`?

Author: I'll remove the name.  It will actually be specified by the calling script so it can be anything.  I've called it "data file" everywhere else.

This tool or the action that uses it, will also be responsible for deploying the widget and data to an S3 bucket for web access.

## Sequence Diagram
![](0000_future_work/sequence.png)

## Filterable Table Widget

In the scope of this RFC is the future work filterable widget. This widget will allow community members to find work that matches their skills and scope appetite.

A quick review of the open-source table solutions led us to Tabulator (https://tabulator.info/) Tabulator has a set of features that cover our use-case, and an MIT license. The screenshot below is a mock-up using this library.

![](0000_future_work/table.png)

Requirements
- Global filter by the text of any cell in the table.
- Grouped by the large sections of work. (`path2` segment in the data.json file)
- Sort by any column
- Initially order the table by `group` and then within the group, by `title`
- Show who is working on this current work item using their GitHub avatar.
- Clickable tags that add / remove the value from search.
- Ability to show columns based on URL query parameters.
- Click through to the detail page in the docs.
- A way to go to the edit page for that doc on GitHub.

> Nice To Haves (will implement if there is time after the requirements are met)

Reviewer 2: **suggestion (non-blocking)**: Another nice to have would be to have a way of gathering statistics of the queries executed against the table as a way to understand what sorts of things the community is looking for.

Author: added.

- Have the tool that generates the central data file, also do sanity checking on the data and fail the build for invalid values.
- Cap the number of tags / skills a document can contain and fail the build if it goes over that max. Ten skill and ten tags should be enough.

## Optional Nice to Have Tasks

- Put the structured front-matter into the future-work/subpage documents so you can see who's working on them, the estimated scope, without having to go to the table widget.
- Link to the table widget from each future work sub-page.

# Drawbacks

Having free form text powering downstream applications that require structured information has some downsides:
- It requires human oversight to make sure the values are uniform and don't become chaotic.
- Getting humans to adopt a structured process requires training and increases cognitive load.

# Rationale and alternatives

We could instead, tie into a structured SaaS platform.  Our internal Shortcut tool could be a possibility here as it potentially allows for structured tags and centralizes all work into a single place.  However, there would be considerable synchronization required. I have not looked into this idea extensively.

> # Unresolved questions

Reviewer 2: **nitpick (non-blocking)**: ☝️🤓 actually... these are resolved since they have answers

A quick review of the open-source table solutions led us to Tabulator (https://tabulator.info/) Tabulator has a set of features that cover our use-case, and an MIT license. The screenshot below is a mock-up using this library.

![](0000_future_work/table.png)

Requirements
- Global filter by the text of any cell in the table.
- Grouped by the large sections of work. (`path2` segment in the data.json file)
- Sort by any column
- Initially order the table by `group` and then within the group, by `title`
- Show who is working on this current work item using their GitHub avatar.
- Clickable tags that add / remove the value from search.
- Ability to show columns based on URL query parameters.
- Click through to the detail page in the docs.
- A way to go to the edit page for that doc on GitHub.

Nice To Haves (will implement if there is time after the requirements are met)
- Structured filtering. Filtering will work with simple text matches, so a search for 'large' will find both the rows with the estimated-scope tag 'large' and titles with 'large' in them as well as matches like largest and larger.

> - Have a way of gathering statistics of the queries executed against the table as a way to understand what sorts of things the community is looking for.

Reviewer: Nice, yeah that is weird re. the free tier. Seems to work pretty well, although the linking wasn't always correct (not sure if it's a limitation of the LLM, their app, or how the linking interacts with our documentation).

<img width="716" height="546" alt="Screenshot 2025-08-22 at 11 39 38 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c042d272-b197-459a-853d-fb9e2bbfd8df" />

Not requirements (but feel free to tell me if you think these are required)
- Persisting the state of the table.  For example, collapsing a group won't be remembered through page reloads.

> - The full text of the future work document will not be included, and therefore not available for search or display within the widget.

Author: Really, it's just scope.  

Search is a surprisingly hard problem with a lot of edge cases that complicate the UI with each fix.

- lots of recall = widget to exclude the body text.
- not clear why something matched - snippets to show where the match was in the text.
- need a combination of search and tag matches - Breadcrumbs to show you were you are.
- Need to apply and / or queries to the structured data - left hand nav with include exclude toggles.

For now, It will be easy to include the body text in the data file that is produced and that way, its just future UI work to start including it.

Some strategies to mitigate the chaos of unstructured text fields
- Create documentation that describes the allowed values and what they're used for.
- Automatically generate part of that documentation page from the values found in the future work front matter sections not as a complete list, but as a reference.
- Have the tool that generates the central data file, also do sanity checking on the data and fail the build for invalid values.
- Cap the number of tags / skills a document can contain and fail the build if it goes over that max. Ten skill and ten tags should be enough.

## Optional Nice to Have Tasks

- Put the structured front-matter into the future-work/subpage documents so you can see who's working on them, the estimated scope, without having to go to the table widget.
- Link to the table widget from each future work sub-page.

# Drawbacks

Having free form text powering downstream applications that require structured information has some downsides:
- It requires human oversight to make sure the values are uniform and don't become chaotic.
- Getting humans to adopt a structured process requires training and increases cognitive load.

# Rationale and alternatives

> We could instead, tie into a structured SaaS platform.  Our internal Shortcut tool could be a possibility here as it potentially allows for structured tags and centralizes all work into a single place.  However, there would be considerable synchronization required. I have not looked into this idea extensively.

Reviewer 3: Its an interesting idea to reach out and see what public features Shortcut has available. I am worried it would be a bit too much to start managing/tracking external people's projects in Shortcut as we don't know the commitments they can make, the workflows they prefer, etc. I would try the current approach for now and see if we ever feel like a more finegrained tool is nescessary.

- Start Date: 2025-08-14
- RFC PR: (leave this empty, it will be filled in after RFC is merged)

# Summary

This RFC proposes to create a centralized process to update the future work artifacts.

# Motivation

Currently, there are three places to update the future work. 
- The markdown files in `docs/future-work` which holds the detailed descriptions of the work being suggested.
- The Google sheet where tasks are broken up by tag and type, as well as indicating who is currently working on a task.
- Our internal task tracking system, Shortcut.

There are some downsides to this:
- Updating 3 places when work is started, and maintaining those places as the work progresses.
- There is currently no way to move from viewing the spreadsheet back to the detailed descriptions of that work.
- It's cumbersome to add new structured data and have it be useful to the community.
- It is not possible to filter the tasks by different aspects. The only grouping we currently have is which Monty component a task relates to (columns in the sheet + sections in the docs). But it would be useful to also be able to filter by skills required, scope, output type, etc...

> There are some upsides to the proposed approach:

Reviewer 4: This reads oddly to me. There hasn't been an approach proposed yet to be talking about the upsides of it.

I probably could come up with a much larger rephrasing, but a simple solution might be...
```suggestion
There are some upsides to the approach we propose in this RFC:
```

- We would like the community to more easily find work to contribute to based on their skills, desire and available time. The skills and scope data doesn't currently exist and adding it to a single place would be preferable.

> 

Reviewer 4: This blank line will add extra padding between these two list items. Unless that's deliberate, it should probably be removed. Initially, I thought it would create two separate unordered lists in the HTML, but it doesn't look like the the GitHub renderer does.

```suggestion
```
